---
tag: lang
---

Finished Chapter 6 of the [Programming D][book]. Figured it's a good
time to record some thoughts on D itself (also since I completed the
first useful D program earlier this week). So the tl;dr is that I'm
**very** interested in D. The language seems to have everything a
developer needs to write well designed software accept a thriving
ecosystem around it. That bit can change, just takes exposure and
marketing. Here are some things that I really like about D.

* Statically typed with an `auto` declartion so you don't have to type
	`int x = 0;` when type can be automaticlly inferred
* Contracts! Automatically enforced for either input or output of a
	function.
* Parameterized types with type checking via `if` clause in the
	function definition
* First class functions & closures
* Decent set of enumerable methods in the standard library (e.g. `map`
	is built in function)
* No need to write `for` loops. Use `foreach`.
* Class invariants! Oh hell yes!
* Classical inheritence implementation with interfaces & multiple
	inheritance
* Metaprogramming!
* `scope` is awesome
* built in unit testing
* Actually concurrency support (`import std.parrallel`)
* UFCS makes it easy to use `foo(bar)` or `bar.foo()` when a function
	accepts the first argument as the correct type.

I will continue my adventures in D. Very promising language with a
small computer. That means it's easy to make a big impact. Thinking of
creating my triple threat: Ruby, D, & Erlang.

[book]: http://www.amazon.com/The-Programming-Language-Andrei-Alexandrescu/dp/0321635361
